draft-amsuess-core-request-tag.md, before:

---
title: Request-Tag option
docname: draft-amsuess-core-request-tag-latest
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: CoRE Working Group

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: C. Amsüss
    name: Christian Amsüss
    organization: Energy Harvesting Solutions
    email: c.amsuess@energyharvesting.at

normative:
  RFC7252:
  RFC2119:

informative:
  RFC7959:
  I-D.draft-ietf-core-object-security-01:
  I-D.draft-mattsson-core-coap-actuators-02:

--- abstract

This memo describes an optional extension to the Constrained Application
Protocol (CoAP, {{RFC7252}} and {{RFC7959}}) that allows matching of request
blocks. This primarily serves to transfer the security properties that Object
Security of CoAP (OSCOAP, {{I-D.ietf-core-object-security}}) provides
for single requests to blockwise transfers. The security of blockwise transfer
in OSCOAP is reflected on here.

--- middle

Introduction
============

The OSCOAP protocol provides a security layer for CoAP that, given a security
context shared with a peer, provides

* encryption of payload and some options,
* integrity protection of the encrypted data and some more message options,
* protection against replays once a request has reached the server, and
* protected matching between request and response messages.

It does not (and should not) provide sequential delivery. In particular, it
does not protect against requests being delayed; the corresponding attack and
mitigation is described in {{I-D.mattsson-core-coap-actuators}}.

The goal of this memo is to provide protection to the bodies of a blockwise
fragmented request/response pair that is equivalent to the protection that
would be provided if the complete request and response bodies fit into single
messae each. (Packing long payloads into single OSCOAP messages is actually
possible using the outer blockwise mechanism, but does not go well with
the constraints of devices CoAP is designed for). \[Author's note: The results
of this might move back into OSCOAP -- for now, the matter is explored here.\]


The proposed method of matching blocks to each other is the introduction of a
Request-Tag option, which is similar to the ETag sent along with responses, but
ephemeral and set by the client. It is phrased in a way that it can not only be
used in OSCOAP, but also by other security mechanisms (eg. CoAP over DTLS), or
for other purposes (see {{appendix-proxy}}).

\[Author's note: At a later stage of this draft, the possibility of moving the
Request-Tag value into the AAD as to not spend transmitted bytes on it, eg. by
mandating OSCOAP clients to use the partial IV as Request-Tag. This requires
ensured agreement between server and client about whether or not a Request-Tag
is present, which can hopefully be obtained in the analysis of the various
forms a blockwise exchange can take.\]

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.

The terms "payload" and "body" are used as in {{RFC7959}}. The complete
interchange of a request and a response body is called a REST "operation",
while a request and response message (as matched by their tokens) is called an
"exchange".

Blockwise transfer cases {#transfercases}
=========================================

There are several shapes a blockwise exchange can take, named here for further
reference. Requests or responses bodies are called "small" or "large" here if
they do or do not, respectively, fit in a single message. Empty bodies are
small.

\[Author's note: I'd appreciate real examples to replace the more contrived
ones; the worst are marked with (?).\]

* *NN*: Request and response bodies are both small. No fragmentation happens.

  Examples: GETs to sensors, PUTs to actors.

* *NS*: A small request causes a large response, which gets fragmented and
  sequentially fetched by the client.

  Examples: GETting an unfiltered link-format list, PUTting a compressed image
  to a picture frame that decides to return its (decompressed) state in full in
  the response(?).

* *NR*: A small request is used to access a large one at random offsets.

  Examples: Inspecting a device's exposed memory.

* *SN*: A large request is sent in sequential blocks with a small (typically
  empty) response.

  The server can, after any block, indicate that it has processed the blocks so
  far, and send a status for the processed ones.

  Examples: FETCHing a complex query, POSTing one's resource list to a resource
  directory.

* *RN*: A large request is sent in a random-access pattern, resulting in a
  small response(s) (typically, one response each, as the server would in that
  scenario send successful responses after each block or small groups of blocks.

  Examples: Storing data in a memory region of a device. (?)

* *SR*, *RR*: Large requests (sequentially or randomly requested) that have
  their large responses fetched in random access patterns -- these cases are
  explicitly forbidden in blockwise transfer ({{RFC7959}} section 2.7).

* *RS*: \[That's a tough one. A) I can't come up with examples, and B) the same
  section 2.7 says that Block2 processing starts when the *last* block is done,
  implying that the request is sequential but not outright prescribing it.
  Furthermore, can there be inbetween successful replies? \]

* *SS*: A large request is sent sequentially, and the large response is fetched
  in sequential blocks after the request has been transmitted in full.

\[Note that the *NS* picture frame example is by far the worst and
farest-fetched. I'd like to have an example of a non-safe request resulting in
fragmented responses, but that behavior is usually discouraged (PUT responses
typically being empty, POST responses bearing a Location), but not outright
forbidden, and catered for in blockwise where it comes to combined use of
Block1 and Block2.\]

\[Missing: analysis\]

Attack scenarios
----------------

This section outlines some attacks that should be mitigated by the Request-Tag
option. They are written with a malicious proxy between client and server in
mind; whether that is a forward, reverse, transparent proxy, or any other
entity on the data path that can intercept and inject packages into the
communication is irrelevant to the attacks.

The illustrations draw terminology (especially the "@" and "X" symbols) from
{{I-D.mattsson-core-coap-actuators}}.

The scenarios typically require the attacker to have a good idea of the content
of the packages that are transferred. Note that the attacker can see the codes
of the messages.

### "Promote Valjean" (on blockwise case SN)

In this scenario, blocks from two operations on a POST-accepting resource are
combined to make the server execute an action that was not intended by the
authorized client. This works only if the client attempts a second operation
after first operation failed (due what the attacker made appear like a network
outage) within the replay window. The client does not receive a confirmation on
the second operation either, but by the time, the server has already executed
the unauthorized action.

~~~~~~~~~~
Client   Foe   Server
   |      |      |
   +------------->    POST "incarcerate" (Block1: 0, more to come)
   |      |      |
   <-------------+    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   +----->@      |    POST "valjean" (Block1: 1, last block)
   |      |      |
   +----->X      |    All retransmissions dropped
   |      |      |

(Client: Odd, but let's go on and promote Javert)

   |      |      |
   +------------->    POST "promote" (Block1: 0, more to come)
   |      |      |
   |      X<-----+    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   |      @------>    POST "valjean" (Block1: 1, last block)
   |      |      |
   |      X<-----+    2.04 Valjean Promoted

~~~~~~~~~~
{: #promotevaljean title="Attack example" }

\[Sequence note: the below refers to so-far unexplained semantics of
Request-Tag, this needs to be resolved.\]

With Request-Tag in place, the client would have assigned a different
Request-Tag to the "promote" line, and the server would have either reacted to
the "valjean" POST by incarcerating valjean (if it could keep both operation
states at the same time), or responded 5.03 to the "promote" request until a
timeout, or responded 4.08 to the injected "valjean" request.

The client would only have been free to use the same Request-Tag on the
"promote" POST as on the "incarcerate" POST if, in the meantime, it had
exchanged enough messages that the latest message of the first use ("valjean")
is dropped from the server's window, and thus the sever would not accept its
replay.

### "Free the hitman" (blockwise case SN)

In this example, mismatched Block1 packages against a resource that passes
judgement are mixed up to create a response matched to the wrong operation.

Again, a first operation is aborted by the proxy ("Homeless stole apples. What
shall we do with him?" -- "Set him free."), and a part of that operation is
later used in a different operation to prime the server for responding
leniently to another operation that would originally have been "Hitman killed
someone. What shall we do with him?" -- "Hang him.".

~~~~~~~~~~
Client   Foe   Server
   |      |      |
   +----->@      |    POST "Homeless stole apples. Wh"
   |      |      |        (Block1: 0, more to come)

(Client: We'll try that one later again; for now, we have something more
urgent:)

   |      |      |
   +------------->    POST "Hitman killed someone. Wh"
   |      |      |        (Block1: 0, more to come)
   |      |      |
   |      @<-----+    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   |      @------>    POST "Homeless stole apples. Wh"
   |      |      |        (Block1: 0, more to come)
   |      |      |
   |      X<-----+    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   <------@      |    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   +------------->    POST "at shall we do with him?"
   |      |      |        (Block1: 1, last block)
   |      |      |
   <-------------+    2.05 "Set him free."
                          (Block1: 1 received, and this is the result)
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #freethehitman title="Attack example" }


\[More examples would help, especially for the other blockwise cases. Is it
relevant to distinguish non-piggybacked responses?\]

The Request-Tag option
======================

A new option is defined for all request methods:

~~~~~~~~~~
+-----+---+---+---+---+-----------------------+--------+--------+---------+
| No. | C | U | N | R | Name                  | Format | Length | Default |
+-----+---+---+---+---+-----------------------+--------+--------+---------+
| TBD | x | x | - |   | Request-Tag           | opaque |    0-8 | (none)  |
+-----+---+---+---+---+-----------------------+--------+--------+---------+

C=Critical, U=Unsafe, N=NoCacheKey, R=Repeatable
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #optsum title="Option summary"}

It is critical (because a client that wants to secure its request body can't
have a server ignore it), unsafe (because it needs to understood by any proxy
that does blockwise (dis)assembly), and not repeatable. (\[Does "unsafe" make
nocachekey irrelevant? I think so.\])

A client MAY set the Request-Tag option to indicate that the receiving server
MUST NOT act on any block in the same blockwise operation that has a different
Request-Tag set.

\[Note on future development: This is probably where OSCOAP compression could
come in and say that when OSCOAP and blockwise is in use, the client MUST set a
Request-Tag if and only if it sets a Block1 option in descriptive usage, and is
value MUST be the partial IV of that message. That value MUST then be included
somewhere in the AAD of every block message *after* the first, where this
compression proposal so far fails because the verifying server would have to
know at AAD-building time whether or not this is an inner blockwise request.\]

If the Request-Tag option is set, the client MAY perform simultaneous
operations that utilize Block1 fragmentation from the same endpoint towards the
same resource, lifting the limitation of {{RFC7959}} section 2.5. The server is
still under no obligation to keep state of more than one transaction. When an
operation is in progress and a second one can not be served at the same time,
the server MUST either respond to the second request with a 5.03 response code
(in which it SHOULD indicate the time it is willing to wait for additional
blocks in the first open operation in the Max-Age option), or cancel the first
operation by responding 4.08 in subsequent exchanges in the first operations.
Clients that see the latter behavior SHOULD \[or MUST?\] fall back to
serializing requests as it would without the Request-Tag option.

\[Author's note: The above paragraph sounds problematic to me. For further
exploration of those error cases, I'd need to know how simultaneous operations
(even on different resources) from different endpoints are handled in
constrained clients; I only did stateless operations in constrained devices so
far.\]

The option is not used in responses.

If a request that uses Request-Tag is rejected with 4.02 Bad Option, the client
MAY retry the operation without it, but it then needs to serialize all
operations that affect the same resource. Security requirements can forbid
dropping the Request-Tag option.


For inclusion in OSCOAP
=======================

\[Editor's note: If this stays a document of its own, OSCOAP should make a
normative reference to it and state something like:\]

Whenever the Block1 option is used as inner option, the Request-Tag option must
be used. The option value must not be reused until any request messages sent in
a different exchange with the same option value have been answered and their
answers have been successfully unprotected, or the sender sequence numbers are
considered invalid by the server (as proven by a response to a request that
bore a request sequence number greater than the old messages' sequence number
plus the window size).

If the client follows the suggestion of only storing its own sequence numbers
to persistent memory every K requests, it needs to make sure to mark seqno plus
windowsize as used, because the next windowsize options can only be used with
certain constraints.

\[Author's note: We could ease the requirement for possibly difficult
compression here by allowing no Request-Tag option too under the same reuse
rules (ie. it'd be OK the first time and then again after ACKs or some
traffic). Clients could then even work around ever needing to send the option
by pushing the failed attempts out of the window, although I'd consider that
bad behavior.\]

\[Author's note: AFAICT this would be the first actual use of the window size;
so far client and server can well interact with different replay window sizes.
Probably it's OK to be the first user of the parameter.\]


\[For the options list:\]

The Request-Discriminator option is added to the "E=\*" category in the options
list, and is listed together with Block1/2 in all other places they are
mentioned.

\[For somewhere else (?):\]

A server responding an inner Block2 option SHOULD use an ETag on it, even if
the result is not cachable (eg. the response to a POST request), and take
reasonable measures against identical ETags on distinct states, otherwise
OSCOAP does not provide integrity protection of the response body.


Rationale
=========

This part is informative and serves to illustrate why this option is
necessary, and how it is different from similar concepts.

Why not...

* forbid out-of-order sequence numbers in blockwise?

  This could be a viable path. To see whether this works, the {{transfercases}}
  chapter would hopefully help. (It should not rule out legitimate cases of
  random acces, after all).

  This would exclude other uses of the option like that in {{appendix-proxy}}.

* put an option in OSCOAP?

  This would work, and might in the end happen with compression of the
  Request-Tag option into the AAD.

  As before, this would exclude other uses cases.

* open up an endpoint per operation?

  This was explored in an earlier draft version as Request-Discriminator, which
  would have been a lightweight way to "multiplex" different endpoints (at
  least for the purpose of blockwise making references to them) into one
  secured connection.

  It is still the author's assumption that this would laregly be equivalent to
  the Request-Tag both in the OSCOAP application and in the use case explored
  in {{appendix-proxy}}, but the Request-Tag path is being explored currently
  because it is easier to understand, explain and reason about, while the
  Request-Discriminator way might result in less normative text with more
  comments, and possibly have similar effects in implementation codebases.


Security Considerations
=======================

The Request Discriminator is limited in its used between a pair of end
points. If used conservatively (ie. only when necessary, and with
as-small-as-possible random discriminators), it only indicates that (and
roughly how many) operations that require distinct endpoints are in
simultaneous use or have previously been unsuccessful.

When used to preclude out-of-order situations between endpoints (as for
example in OSCOAP), it is essential that implementations store the
usable state of a discriminator for as long as required (eg. in parallel
with sequence numbers). Failure to do so leads to reuse of a
discriminator, and thus opens up the possibility of replays.

Servers that rely on consistent states set by clients must be aware that
the out-of-order guarantees added by this mechanism only cover
operations that are required by RFC7959 to originate from the same
endpoint (or security association). Block1 requests should therefore be
limited to atomic operations as outlined in that document's security
considerations.

IANA Considerations
===================

\[Missing: have a number assigned and the option published\]

--- back

# Use of Request-Tag by proxies {#appendix-proxy}

(something along the lines of) It is currently rare that a proxy ever need to
serialize blockwise transactions. It could need to at any time, though.
Especially with OSCOAP. This is how it could use Request-Tag to parallelize, if
it can afford the state...

Commit message:

Request-Discriminator to Request-Tag rephrasing (part 3)
* Security considerations updated
* Proxy appendix detailed

draft-amsuess-core-request-tag.md, after:

---
title: Request-Tag option
docname: draft-amsuess-core-request-tag-latest
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: CoRE Working Group

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: C. Amsüss
    name: Christian Amsüss
    organization: Energy Harvesting Solutions
    email: c.amsuess@energyharvesting.at

normative:
  RFC7252:
  RFC2119:

informative:
  RFC7959:
  I-D.draft-ietf-core-object-security-01:
  I-D.draft-mattsson-core-coap-actuators-02:

--- abstract

This memo describes an optional extension to the Constrained Application
Protocol (CoAP, {{RFC7252}} and {{RFC7959}}) that allows matching of request
blocks. This primarily serves to transfer the security properties that Object
Security of CoAP (OSCOAP, {{I-D.ietf-core-object-security}}) provides
for single requests to blockwise transfers. The security of blockwise transfer
in OSCOAP is reflected on here.

--- middle

Introduction
============

The OSCOAP protocol provides a security layer for CoAP that, given a security
context shared with a peer, provides

* encryption of payload and some options,
* integrity protection of the encrypted data and some more message options,
* protection against replays once a request has reached the server, and
* protected matching between request and response messages.

It does not (and should not) provide sequential delivery. In particular, it
does not protect against requests being delayed; the corresponding attack and
mitigation is described in {{I-D.mattsson-core-coap-actuators}}.

The goal of this memo is to provide protection to the bodies of a blockwise
fragmented request/response pair that is equivalent to the protection that
would be provided if the complete request and response bodies fit into single
messae each. (Packing long payloads into single OSCOAP messages is actually
possible using the outer blockwise mechanism, but does not go well with
the constraints of devices CoAP is designed for). \[Author's note: The results
of this might move back into OSCOAP -- for now, the matter is explored here.\]


The proposed method of matching blocks to each other is the introduction of a
Request-Tag option, which is similar to the ETag sent along with responses, but
ephemeral and set by the client. It is phrased in a way that it can not only be
used in OSCOAP, but also by other security mechanisms (eg. CoAP over DTLS), or
for other purposes (see {{appendix-proxy}}).

\[Author's note: At a later stage of this draft, the possibility of moving the
Request-Tag value into the AAD as to not spend transmitted bytes on it, eg. by
mandating OSCOAP clients to use the partial IV as Request-Tag. This requires
ensured agreement between server and client about whether or not a Request-Tag
is present, which can hopefully be obtained in the analysis of the various
forms a blockwise exchange can take.\]

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.

The terms "payload" and "body" are used as in {{RFC7959}}. The complete
interchange of a request and a response body is called a REST "operation",
while a request and response message (as matched by their tokens) is called an
"exchange".

Blockwise transfer cases {#transfercases}
=========================================

There are several shapes a blockwise exchange can take, named here for further
reference. Requests or responses bodies are called "small" or "large" here if
they do or do not, respectively, fit in a single message. Empty bodies are
small.

\[Author's note: I'd appreciate real examples to replace the more contrived
ones; the worst are marked with (?).\]

* *NN*: Request and response bodies are both small. No fragmentation happens.

  Examples: GETs to sensors, PUTs to actors.

* *NS*: A small request causes a large response, which gets fragmented and
  sequentially fetched by the client.

  Examples: GETting an unfiltered link-format list, PUTting a compressed image
  to a picture frame that decides to return its (decompressed) state in full in
  the response(?).

* *NR*: A small request is used to access a large one at random offsets.

  Examples: Inspecting a device's exposed memory.

* *SN*: A large request is sent in sequential blocks with a small (typically
  empty) response.

  The server can, after any block, indicate that it has processed the blocks so
  far, and send a status for the processed ones.

  Examples: FETCHing a complex query, POSTing one's resource list to a resource
  directory.

* *RN*: A large request is sent in a random-access pattern, resulting in a
  small response(s) (typically, one response each, as the server would in that
  scenario send successful responses after each block or small groups of blocks.

  Examples: Storing data in a memory region of a device. (?)

* *SR*, *RR*: Large requests (sequentially or randomly requested) that have
  their large responses fetched in random access patterns -- these cases are
  explicitly forbidden in blockwise transfer ({{RFC7959}} section 2.7).

* *RS*: \[That's a tough one. A) I can't come up with examples, and B) the same
  section 2.7 says that Block2 processing starts when the *last* block is done,
  implying that the request is sequential but not outright prescribing it.
  Furthermore, can there be inbetween successful replies? \]

* *SS*: A large request is sent sequentially, and the large response is fetched
  in sequential blocks after the request has been transmitted in full.

\[Note that the *NS* picture frame example is by far the worst and
farest-fetched. I'd like to have an example of a non-safe request resulting in
fragmented responses, but that behavior is usually discouraged (PUT responses
typically being empty, POST responses bearing a Location), but not outright
forbidden, and catered for in blockwise where it comes to combined use of
Block1 and Block2.\]

\[Missing: analysis\]

Attack scenarios
----------------

This section outlines some attacks that should be mitigated by the Request-Tag
option. They are written with a malicious proxy between client and server in
mind; whether that is a forward, reverse, transparent proxy, or any other
entity on the data path that can intercept and inject packages into the
communication is irrelevant to the attacks.

The illustrations draw terminology (especially the "@" and "X" symbols) from
{{I-D.mattsson-core-coap-actuators}}.

The scenarios typically require the attacker to have a good idea of the content
of the packages that are transferred. Note that the attacker can see the codes
of the messages.

### "Promote Valjean" (on blockwise case SN)

In this scenario, blocks from two operations on a POST-accepting resource are
combined to make the server execute an action that was not intended by the
authorized client. This works only if the client attempts a second operation
after first operation failed (due what the attacker made appear like a network
outage) within the replay window. The client does not receive a confirmation on
the second operation either, but by the time, the server has already executed
the unauthorized action.

~~~~~~~~~~
Client   Foe   Server
   |      |      |
   +------------->    POST "incarcerate" (Block1: 0, more to come)
   |      |      |
   <-------------+    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   +----->@      |    POST "valjean" (Block1: 1, last block)
   |      |      |
   +----->X      |    All retransmissions dropped
   |      |      |

(Client: Odd, but let's go on and promote Javert)

   |      |      |
   +------------->    POST "promote" (Block1: 0, more to come)
   |      |      |
   |      X<-----+    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   |      @------>    POST "valjean" (Block1: 1, last block)
   |      |      |
   |      X<-----+    2.04 Valjean Promoted

~~~~~~~~~~
{: #promotevaljean title="Attack example" }

\[Sequence note: the below refers to so-far unexplained semantics of
Request-Tag, this needs to be resolved.\]

With Request-Tag in place, the client would have assigned a different
Request-Tag to the "promote" line, and the server would have either reacted to
the "valjean" POST by incarcerating valjean (if it could keep both operation
states at the same time), or responded 5.03 to the "promote" request until a
timeout, or responded 4.08 to the injected "valjean" request.

The client would only have been free to use the same Request-Tag on the
"promote" POST as on the "incarcerate" POST if, in the meantime, it had
exchanged enough messages that the latest message of the first use ("valjean")
is dropped from the server's window, and thus the sever would not accept its
replay.

### "Free the hitman" (blockwise case SN)

In this example, mismatched Block1 packages against a resource that passes
judgement are mixed up to create a response matched to the wrong operation.

Again, a first operation is aborted by the proxy ("Homeless stole apples. What
shall we do with him?" -- "Set him free."), and a part of that operation is
later used in a different operation to prime the server for responding
leniently to another operation that would originally have been "Hitman killed
someone. What shall we do with him?" -- "Hang him.".

~~~~~~~~~~
Client   Foe   Server
   |      |      |
   +----->@      |    POST "Homeless stole apples. Wh"
   |      |      |        (Block1: 0, more to come)

(Client: We'll try that one later again; for now, we have something more
urgent:)

   |      |      |
   +------------->    POST "Hitman killed someone. Wh"
   |      |      |        (Block1: 0, more to come)
   |      |      |
   |      @<-----+    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   |      @------>    POST "Homeless stole apples. Wh"
   |      |      |        (Block1: 0, more to come)
   |      |      |
   |      X<-----+    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   <------@      |    2.31 CONTINUE (Block1: 0 received, send more)
   |      |      |
   +------------->    POST "at shall we do with him?"
   |      |      |        (Block1: 1, last block)
   |      |      |
   <-------------+    2.05 "Set him free."
                          (Block1: 1 received, and this is the result)
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #freethehitman title="Attack example" }


\[More examples would help, especially for the other blockwise cases. Is it
relevant to distinguish non-piggybacked responses?\]

The Request-Tag option
======================

A new option is defined for all request methods:

~~~~~~~~~~
+-----+---+---+---+---+-----------------------+--------+--------+---------+
| No. | C | U | N | R | Name                  | Format | Length | Default |
+-----+---+---+---+---+-----------------------+--------+--------+---------+
| TBD | x | x | - |   | Request-Tag           | opaque |    0-8 | (none)  |
+-----+---+---+---+---+-----------------------+--------+--------+---------+

C=Critical, U=Unsafe, N=NoCacheKey, R=Repeatable
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #optsum title="Option summary"}

It is critical (because a client that wants to secure its request body can't
have a server ignore it), unsafe (because it needs to understood by any proxy
that does blockwise (dis)assembly), and not repeatable. (\[Does "unsafe" make
nocachekey irrelevant? I think so.\])

A client MAY set the Request-Tag option to indicate that the receiving server
MUST NOT act on any block in the same blockwise operation that has a different
Request-Tag set.

\[Note on future development: This is probably where OSCOAP compression could
come in and say that when OSCOAP and blockwise is in use, the client MUST set a
Request-Tag if and only if it sets a Block1 option in descriptive usage, and is
value MUST be the partial IV of that message. That value MUST then be included
somewhere in the AAD of every block message *after* the first, where this
compression proposal so far fails because the verifying server would have to
know at AAD-building time whether or not this is an inner blockwise request.\]

If the Request-Tag option is set, the client MAY perform simultaneous
operations that utilize Block1 fragmentation from the same endpoint towards the
same resource, lifting the limitation of {{RFC7959}} section 2.5. The server is
still under no obligation to keep state of more than one transaction. When an
operation is in progress and a second one can not be served at the same time,
the server MUST either respond to the second request with a 5.03 response code
(in which it SHOULD indicate the time it is willing to wait for additional
blocks in the first open operation in the Max-Age option), or cancel the first
operation by responding 4.08 in subsequent exchanges in the first operations.
Clients that see the latter behavior SHOULD \[or MUST?\] fall back to
serializing requests as it would without the Request-Tag option.

\[Author's note: The above paragraph sounds problematic to me. For further
exploration of those error cases, I'd need to know how simultaneous operations
(even on different resources) from different endpoints are handled in
constrained clients; I only did stateless operations in constrained devices so
far.\]

The option is not used in responses.

If a request that uses Request-Tag is rejected with 4.02 Bad Option, the client
MAY retry the operation without it, but it then needs to serialize all
operations that affect the same resource. Security requirements can forbid
dropping the Request-Tag option.


For inclusion in OSCOAP
=======================

\[Editor's note: If this stays a document of its own, OSCOAP should make a
normative reference to it and state something like:\]

Whenever the Block1 option is used as inner option, the Request-Tag option must
be used. The option value must not be reused until any request messages sent in
a different exchange with the same option value have been answered and their
answers have been successfully unprotected, or the sender sequence numbers are
considered invalid by the server (as proven by a response to a request that
bore a request sequence number greater than the old messages' sequence number
plus the window size).

If the client follows the suggestion of only storing its own sequence numbers
to persistent memory every K requests, it needs to make sure to mark seqno plus
windowsize as used, because the next windowsize options can only be used with
certain constraints.

\[Author's note: We could ease the requirement for possibly difficult
compression here by allowing no Request-Tag option too under the same reuse
rules (ie. it'd be OK the first time and then again after ACKs or some
traffic). Clients could then even work around ever needing to send the option
by pushing the failed attempts out of the window, although I'd consider that
bad behavior.\]

\[Author's note: AFAICT this would be the first actual use of the window size;
so far client and server can well interact with different replay window sizes.
Probably it's OK to be the first user of the parameter.\]


\[For the options list:\]

The Request-Discriminator option is added to the "E=\*" category in the options
list, and is listed together with Block1/2 in all other places they are
mentioned.

\[For somewhere else (?):\]

A server responding an inner Block2 option SHOULD use an ETag on it, even if
the result is not cachable (eg. the response to a POST request), and take
reasonable measures against identical ETags on distinct states, otherwise
OSCOAP does not provide integrity protection of the response body.


Rationale
=========

This part is informative and serves to illustrate why this option is
necessary, and how it is different from similar concepts.

Why not...

* forbid out-of-order sequence numbers in blockwise?

  This could be a viable path. To see whether this works, the {{transfercases}}
  chapter would hopefully help. (It should not rule out legitimate cases of
  random acces, after all).

  This would exclude other uses of the option like that in {{appendix-proxy}}.

* put an option in OSCOAP?

  This would work, and might in the end happen with compression of the
  Request-Tag option into the AAD.

  As before, this would exclude other uses cases.

* open up an endpoint per operation?

  This was explored in an earlier draft version as Request-Discriminator, which
  would have been a lightweight way to "multiplex" different endpoints (at
  least for the purpose of blockwise making references to them) into one
  secured connection.

  It is still the author's assumption that this would laregly be equivalent to
  the Request-Tag both in the OSCOAP application and in the use case explored
  in {{appendix-proxy}}, but the Request-Tag path is being explored currently
  because it is easier to understand, explain and reason about, while the
  Request-Discriminator way might result in less normative text with more
  comments, and possibly have similar effects in implementation codebases.


Security Considerations
=======================

When used in combination with OSCOAP or other security layers to prevent block
mixing between REST operations, it is crucial to only reuse request tags as
specified, and not to use any affected sequence numbers (which means the latest
sequence number plus the window size) should information about used request
tags get lost.


While the Request-Tag is not echoed back by the server unlike the Token, the
client should still refrain from setting it to internal values (like memory
address of state data) to avoid exposing internal data to a server that it
could use in unrelated attacks.

IANA Considerations
===================

\[Missing: have a number assigned and the option published\]

--- back

# Use of Request-Tag by proxies {#appendix-proxy}

In pre-OSCOAP practice, proxies rarely face situations where simultaneous
Block1 operations from different affect a single resource and can not be
executed in parallel due to the constraints of only one Block1 operation being
possible per endpoint pair and resource. (If that happens, the proxy can either
serialize the requests, or 5.03 the second requester until the first request
has completed).

With OSCOAP, all clients access the resource `/` as far as a proxy is
concerned, which would lead to more frequent situations in which it would need
to serialize requests. Clients that employ OSCOAP's outer-blockwise mechanism
find themselves in a similar situation.

Those proxies and clients can utilize the Request-Tag option work off those
requests in parallel by assigning them different Request-Tag values. To a
proxy, this will only mean an increase in state of up to eight bytes per
operation (if it could handle unencrypted simultaneous requests, it would tell
them apart by their URIs; here, it tells them apart by their request tags). The
state a server needs to keep per operation increases by the same eight bytes
compared to serving the same simultaneous requests directly to different
endopoints.
